A few days ago, as I sat in my pleasant parlour looking out on one of
the fairest prospects in this our fair land of England, my cousin, Sir
Henry Erskine, who hath been spending some days at our house, entered
the room with his quick soldier-like step, and came to a halt, as he
would say, at my side.

“See here, cousin!” he cried, holding out to me a packet of papers,
“there is something here that will interest you. These letters were
given me by my Uncle Charles, my Lord Tinwald, t’other day when I was
visiting at Alva House, and I have but just looked into them. They were
written, I find, by my mother of blessed memory to Sir John, while he
was abroad in exile for his misdeeds, as one may say now, in the year
1716.”

I caught at the papers with a cry, half of delight and half of tender
sorrow, for if Henry’s voice had softened as he mentioned his mother’s
name, ’twas no more than her due, who was ever the wisest and most
loving of parents; and if to him, the thought of her represented all
that is sweetest and best in womanhood--as one may suppose, seeing he
hath not yet crowned perfection by taking unto himself a wife--to me
it did no less, being as I was the object of her most tender care and
kindness at a time in my life when I sorely needed both.

The sight of those thin broad sheets, covered with the fine clear
writing which had once been so familiar to me, brought the tears to
my eyes. Sure they were well worn, those ancient letters, having been
borne in Sir John’s wallet, no doubt, for many a weary month, and since
lain by in some desk or chest at Alva House for safety; and at the
sight of the seal on the back, so carefully broken that the wax still
retained on many of the sheets its perfect imprint, a vision of my
dear lady folding and sealing with trembling haste one of these same
precious letters, came so clear to my mind, that almost I thought I
heard her voice calling to me as in the days of old.

“See, Henry,” I said softly, pointing to the seal, “how well I remember
the ring she ever used. Too large for her slender hand, she wore it
on a long gold chain around her neck. Your father, Sir John, had used
it when writing to her before they were wed, and, sweet woman that
she was, she would never have any other for the letters that passed
between them. ‘For, Barbara,’ said she to me once, and I can still see
her smile, ‘the legend is so true, that ’twould be folly to take to
another.’”

Together we bent over the faded wax, and Henry laid his lips upon it
gently. There has ever been a spirit of poetry and chivalry in this
stalwart soldier, whom as a little child I had so often held upon my
knee.

“A heart embossed, and round it the words, ‘_Vous y regnez seul_.’
True, indeed!” said he with a smile; “Sir John reigned there alone,
and even her children were in her heart but little subjects to their
rightful king.”

“Sure, my dear, you lost nothing by that,” I cried, “for happier
children, or a kindlier home I never did see. The love that filled my
lady’s heart was a bounteous fire that brightened and warmed all who
approached her. Sweet soul! I thank God still for having known and
loved her.”

Saying this I turned my eyes again upon the letters in my hands, and so
potent was the spell of the first few words I read, that my mind leapt
back across a gulf of forty years, and left my body sitting blind and
deaf in the chair in my sunny English parlour.

A sudden laugh from Sir Henry brought my wits home again.

“Cousin Barbara,” he cried, “I have been speaking to you for some
minutes and not one word have you heard of my discourse. Nay, dear
cousin, do not apologise. The love you bore my mother hath ever been a
tie between her children and yourself, and I know well that your tender
heart is filled with regretful memories at sight of these letters writ
by her hand.”

“She was indeed the dearest woman-friend I ever had,” said I. “Alas!
too early lost.”

“And for that very reason,” said he, “I made my bold request, which,
as you did not hear it, I must needs repeat. Will you not, for the
love you bore those that are passed away, and a little for the love
of us who remain, write out for our instruction and profit, your
recollections of that troublous time, with something also of your own
romance, and the strange story of the Silver Glen which I have so often
heard from you as a boy?”

My gaze went past him out of the window, across miles of green pasture
and softly waving foliage to the silver shining of the Severn beyond.
Far, far away the hills of Wales rose into the sky, the day being clear
and bright. Close to the house the flowers were blooming very sweet
and fragrant, for the month was June, and in the shrubbery behind the
garden, the blackbirds and thrushes sang their best.

“Of course, if you should think it too great a labour--” Sir Henry
broke in upon my musings, but I held up my hand to stop him.

“Nay, cousin,” I cried, “’twould be what is called ‘a labour of love’
surely. I was but thinking how little fit I am to be the chronicler of
those exciting times. I will not be so mock-modest as to pretend to
consider myself unfit in the matter of appreciating your dear mother’s
character and conduct, for few had the opportunities to know and esteem
her that I had. But I am truly no historian, and the tale will be
written from my own point of view, which needs must be a narrow one.
I have, I believe, upstairs hidden away in the corner of some ancient
chest, a diary of that same year writ in a girlish hand. By help of
this, and by reading, since you permit it, these sacred letters, I
promise you I will do my best endeavour to give you a true and full
account of the events that took place in your home, and among your
family, when you were an innocent small boy of four or five years old.
But consider a little how long a time has passed. My youth with all its
fears and follies, its joys and sorrows, is far away. I have wandered
back and forth upon the earth, knowing many changes and living in
distant lands, for a wife, as you know, must ever be ready to follow
her husband; and if now in the evening of my life I can sit placidly
at this sunny window looking out upon the Severn Sea, and know that my
dear and kind spouse is no further away than in the next room, or in
the garden, or at the home-farm, I thank God very humbly in my heart,
Who has brought me to this peaceful place by a way that I knew not,
and little expected to find. Dear Henry, I am but a garrulous old
woman, and what I want to say is, that if my memory of those distant
days is grown a little dim, and certain things are gone from my mind
never to return, I must pray you to forgive me, and put it down, not to
foolishness, but to old age.”

Whereupon Sir Henry rallied me upon my fears, and laughed at me for
calling myself old, who am scarce more than a dozen years his senior,
and kissing my hand in the gallant way he has, he left me sitting by
the window with these old letters in my lap.

And suddenly, after a long silence, a single mavis burst into song,
and trilled and throbbed so exquisite a melody that I held my breath
to listen. For there were many years of my life in which I did not
hear that lovely music, and now a mavis never sings in the long sweet
twilight but my thoughts fly out to my lost dear, Catherine, Lady
Erskine (for a reason that I hope to tell you by-and-bye), and it
seemed strange that when my mind was so full of her, the bird that I
always think of as hers should start to make music beside me. But I
have often noticed in my changeful life, the little happenings that
link our minds with the past and the future, with facts on earth and
aspirations in Heaven, with human hopes and divine longings, so that
the scent of a flower, or a child’s laugh, or a glorious sunset, or a
sudden happiness, may lift our hearts, before we know it, right into
the presence of God.

All letters it seems to me must in a greater or less degree be the
exponents of the writer’s mind. Of some, indeed, we might say that they
mirror very clearly the character and disposition of their authors,
and more especially when exchanged between two close and loving
friends without fear of outside criticism, or any thought of possible
publicity. Most truly is this the case in the letters before me. So
intimate and natural they are that I almost shrink from exposing them
to the eyes of strangers, however kind and sympathetic these may be;
and yet they can but excite the warmest affection and admiration in all
minds, being the outpourings of a loyal, loving and courageous heart.
They were written in haste oftentimes, in doubt and fear and terrible
anxiety, but not once does the brave spirit falter nor the love in them
grow cold or dim.

Now it is true that, as I said to Sir Henry, my view of those far-off
events of my girlhood, besides having grown somewhat dim, must be but
a narrow one, for I lived as it were in the midst of the story, and
could not know at the time many facts and results that were afterwards
made plain to all. To such as may care to read my simple narrative,
which, if plain and unstudied, is yet true and I think not wanting in
interest, I must say at once that my sole reason in undertaking the
task is my desire to make more widely known among her descendants,
namely, my dear God-daughter, Barbara; her niece, Christian, poor
Charles’s little girl, and Sir Henry, who will I hope marry and have
a family of his own, as well as to my own dear daughter and her
children--the character of the sweet and noble woman who was the friend
of my youth.

I therefore make no apology for leaving to the writers of history many
details of that unhappy time; only so far as it touched upon the lives
and happiness of those I loved does it concern me. And so, with no more
than a humble regret that my skill is not more worthy of my theme, I
take up my pen to begin this story of the so-called Rebellion in the
year seventeen hundred and fifteen.




CHAPTER I

SHOWS HOW BARBARA STEWART LEFT SCHOOL


’Twas in the early hours of a dark December morning in the year 1714
that I was awakened suddenly by the cautious opening of the chamber
door, and saw with blinking eyes the bare room where I slept with three
of my school companions. The wavering flicker of a candle carried by
a cautious hand showed me the night-capped heads upon their pillows,
the bare walls, the uncarpeted floor, the staring, black, uncurtained
window, and, the sight arousing no interest in my mind, I closed my
eyes against the intruding light. Little Miss Gordon, the youngest girl
in the school, who slept in the bed with me, raised a protesting arm
across her face, and called out in accents sleepy and petulant, “Oh,
Betsy, take that horrid light away. ’Tis not morning yet, I am but just
fallen asleep!”

Now it has always been my custom to awake up instantly with all my
senses on the alert. I say it not to boast, though the faculty hath
served me well once or twice in my life, for some are born so, just
as others are drowsy-heads from the cradle to the grave; but this
being my habit, I had seen with the first opening of my eyes that
it was not Betsy, the maid, who had entered our room, but no less a
personage than Mistress Marget Lindsay, the younger of the two sisters
who kept a boarding-school for young ladies in Paterson’s Court, off
the Lawnmarket in Edinburgh. Now, Mistress Marget, besides being the
younger of our school-mistresses, was the one least feared by their
pupils; I had almost said the best loved, but in those days (I know not
if it be so still), anything so gentle as love scarce entered into the
training of young ladies at school. That she had a kind heart, however,
I have been sure ever since that dark, winter morn, as, shading the
candle with her hand, she came quickly to my bed-side and bent down to
discover if I were still asleep.

“Miss Stewart, my dear--Barbara. Are you awake?” she cried softly.

I sat up in bed and untied my cap-strings, the better to hear what she
had to say.

“I am awake, madam; what is it you want of me? Sure, ’tis not time yet
for me to be at my exercises!” said I, a little alarmed at the gravity
of her face.

She shook her head and sat down beside me on the bed.

“No, no, child; do not be alarmed! And yet I fear I have news that will
disquiet you. A man-servant has come from Rosyth to take you home. You
must rise at once and attire yourself for the journey.”

“A man-servant?” I repeated, obediently putting one foot out of bed.
“Old Robert, belike. Oh, Mistress Marget!” I cried, stopping suddenly,
“pray tell me at once what is wrong.”

With the truest kindness the good woman did not attempt to turn my
thoughts aside from their fear. She answered immediately and without
circumlocution.

“Your grandfather, Miss Stewart, has met with an accident, and ’tis
feared he cannot live. He would see you, dear bairn, before he dies.”

There may be some who think this stern announcement to a young maid
of sixteen somewhat wanting in tenderness and compassion. They may
consider that to hint at a possible calamity, mentioning a severe
illness or the like, but holding out hopes of a speedy recovery, would
have been the kinder way. If so, I cannot agree with them. The progress
of “preparing the mind” of any poor creature to receive a blow hath
always seemed to me both cruel and useless. In many cases, the more
sudden the shock, the more strongly is the mind braced to bear it for
the moment; and so it was in my own case. I leapt from my bed and began
hurriedly to put on my clothes.

“My grandpapa dying, and asking for me? Oh, Mistress Marget, I must
hasten; I pray you, assist me with this lace. Will you not kindly tie
these strings? Hath Robert brought the carriage? Ah no! the snow is
too deep. I am to ride pillion? Yes, I must wear my thickest shawl and
hood. Oh, do not hinder me, dear madam, I must be going now; I cannot
keep Robert waiting another moment.”

“My dear Miss Stewart,” said my mistress, quietly detaining me while
she tied a thick veil over my face, and searched for scarf and mits,
“Robert is in the kitchen being warmed and fed. The good creature was
almost lifeless from the cold. And do you think, my dear girl, that
my sister would suffer you to leave her house at this hour fasting?
There is no speed in such senseless haste as you know, and while I
admire your courage and fortitude, and the eagerness you exhibit to do
your grandfather’s behest, I must counsel you, my dear, to remember
that patience is one of the highest virtues a woman can possess, and
self-control is another.”

Tears rose in my eyes, not so much at the rebuke as in rebellion
against it; for Barbara Stewart was ever hot and hasty in those young
days, and indeed hath scarce yet learned to exercise the virtues
extolled by good Mistress Marget in all the years that she hath lived.
But chafe as I would at the delay, I was forced to go into the parlour,
where the elder sister Lindsay, hastily attired, and with a shawl over
her night-cap, waited for me in the candle-light with hot chocolate and
buttered oatcake.

I think the strangeness of that morning scene, and the unwonted
consideration with which I was treated, took my mind a little from the
gravity of the situation. I know that it was not till I was mounted
behind Robert, and clinging to the broad belt he wore as we paced along
the stony street, that it entered into my head to ask him for news of
my poor grandpapa. It was then that I heard how, in riding not many
days before, his horse had slipped upon a piece of ice, and had thrown
the poor gentleman with such violence that an old wound, got near
twenty years before at the siege of Namur, had opened, and inflammation
having set in, the doctor now gave little hope of his recovery.

“I’m thinkin’, mem, the Colonel’s juist waitin’ tae bid ye gude-bye,”
said honest Robert very sadly.

The news made me grave and sober enough--sorrowful, too, and fearful,
for my good grandpapa had been indulgent beyond the common, and,
besides him, I knew of no other relative that I possessed in the world.
My father, his only son, had been one of Webb’s most gallant officers,
and had married in Flanders, after the Peace of Ryswick, Mademoiselle
Jeanne de St. Pierre, the orphan niece of the French admiral of that
name; for, as you know, love and peace grew and flourished between
private individuals of the rival nations even while their countries
were at daggers drawn. My mother, besides possessing wit and beauty,
had a small fortune of her own, and she and my dear father lived very
happily together, sometimes in Brussels, in Paris, or in London. But
he, dying of fever, induced by wounds which he received at the taking
of Liège in 1702, left his young widow and little daughter to the care
of Colonel Stewart of Rosyth House in the county of Fife. My mother,
fragile and broken-hearted, survived his death little more than a year.
Thus, before I had reached my sixth birthday, was I bereft of both my
parents.

Brought up with care and kindness in my grandpapa’s commodious house on
the shore of the Forth, I had been sent at the age of thirteen to the
Seminary for Young Ladies of Good Family, kept by the sisters Lindsay,
and had just completed my third year in that select and fashionable
school.

Such in brief was the story of my life down to that dismal winter
morning which found me riding behind Robert Guthrie, my grandfather’s
old servant, along the bare road that leads from Edinburgh to the
Queen’s Ferry. Very bleak and cold it was, for the sun was not yet
risen, and a chill wind blew right in our faces out of the north-west.
The ground was covered with snow, and, though at another time I might
have noticed with pleasure the purity of its whiteness in contrast to
the grey sky and the black waters of the Firth (for all my life I have
had open eyes and heart to the beauties of the earth) this day my
mind was too full of anxious cares to allow me any such consolation. I
was cold and cheerless enough with the nine miles ride when we reached
the Hawse Inn, where we alighted to wait for the ferry-boat to take
us across to the coast of Fife, and the good landlady bustled out
with a cup of hot spiced claret to take the chill out of my bones, as
she said. She brought me in to the warm fireside, and with many kind
commiserating words she sought, in the fulness of her heart, to lighten
my gloom. She had heard from Robert Guthrie how Colonel Stewart lay at
the point of death, and, in her motherly way, she pitied the poor girl
who was so soon to be left alone in the world. I thanked her with what
courage I could muster, but when she saw that I could scarce restrain
the trembling of my lips, she very wisely left me to myself and busied
herself about her household tasks.

Almost at the moment when we stepped on board the ferry-boat, the sun,
which was now some way above the horizon though wrapped in clouds,
struggled forth from the enveloping mists, and in a very short time
changed the aspect of the landscape from dismal gloom to sparkling
radiance.

Before we were half-way across the Frith I was so far roused from my
abstraction to note this change, and whether it was that, the day being
a sort of landmark between the old life and the new, all impressions
received then upon my mind retained a peculiar distinctness, I know
not; but this I know, that though I have made the same crossing many
scores of times since, whenever I think of the passage of the Forth, I
see it as I saw it that winter morning. The noble river flowing between
its ever widening shores sparkled in the early light, reflecting on its
bosom the blue of the sky, broken here and there by little white waves
that seemed to laugh to each other as they raced out to sea. The grey
stone houses of the little town we had just left, with their red-tiled
roofs, looked picturesque, all huddled down together to the water’s
edge. Westward as I gazed, the tall thin masts of vessels moored at
Charlestown and Borrowstownness, stood up slender and distinct in the
clear air; and far away as a dream-like background the peaks of the
majestic mountains, Ben Lomond, Ben Ledi, Ben Muich Dhui, their summits
crowned with gleaming snow, towered towards the pale blue sky. Near at
hand, the fishing craft putting out from either coast, shot up their
sails to catch the freshening breeze, and over all the sea-gulls flew
restlessly, or dived into the water with wild, musical cries, their
white wings gleaming in the sunlight.

For a moment I forgot my grief in the freshness and beauty of the
morning, and turned for a sympathetic word from my companion, but at
sight of his face I refrained. The old man was standing not far from
where I sat, one hand upon the bridle of his horse, his head drooping,
and his dim blue eyes fixed on vacancy. His kindly, weather-beaten face
was very sorrowful, and I knew that he was looking far back into the
past, when he and his beloved master had been young, for Robert had
followed my grandfather to the wars, and they had been through many
hardships and shared some triumphs together. Into my light and girlish
mind came the thought that here was a grief ten times greater than my
own, and in presence of it I felt strangely small and insignificant.
Sandy, the horse, too used to the ferry-boat to be disturbed by the
crossing, seemed to divine his old friend’s trouble in the curious way
dumb animals have, for he rubbed his soft cheek against the groom’s
shoulder with an affectionate, caressing motion.

My heart went out to the old man in his sorrow, and when two slow tears
welled out of his eyes and rolled down his wrinkled face, I started up,
impulsive as I too often was, and ran to his side to comfort him.

“Dinna greet, Robbie!” I cried, though softly, that the boatmen should
not hear. “Dinna greet! I canna bear to see ye. You and me’ll aye be
friends!”

He turned and smiled at my words, and I thought the smile was sadder
than the tears.

“Eh, my bonnie wee leddie!” he said, as if I had been still but a
bairn, “it’s Robbie has got a sair heart the day.”




CHAPTER II

HOW BARBARA CAME TO ROSYTH FOR THE LAST TIME


Rosyth House stood (for alas! it stands no longer, having been burned
to the ground in the year 1727, on the very day that his present
Gracious Majesty came to the throne), on the high ground above the
Forth, about a mile and a half from the landing place at the North
Ferry. A quarter of a mile further west, the ancient castle of the same
name stands on a promontory stretching out into the sea, so near the
water that at high tide it is wholly surrounded and cut off from the
shore, except for an artificial stone causeway connecting it with the
mainland.

My grandfather, who was a distant cousin of the Laird of Rosyth, had
got leave, upon retiring from active service, to build a house upon his
land; but the latter, having some years before I was born disposed of
his estate to a gentleman of the name of Drummond, it was understood
that Colonel Stewart had only a life-rent of the same, his heirs being
to receive a fair sum of money in lieu thereof at his death. This
arrangement, though little to his liking at the time, grieved him less
after the death of his son, my father, and although he could not feel
the loving pride in keeping up the place that a man expends upon his
own, still the cultivation of his grounds and garden had been a source
of pleasure and solace to him in the latter years of his life. The
house was comfortable and commodious, and sheltered from the winds, so
that the shrubs and trees he had taken pains to plant had well grown up
around it; and from the windows there was at all times a fair view of
the waters of the Frith with the ships passing up and down, and beyond
them the low green coast of the Lothians.

Beautiful or plain, it was the only home I had ever known, and for
that reason very dear to me; and as we rounded the bend of the road
that skirts St. Margaret’s Hope, and the familiar landmarks came into
view, the tears rushed to my eyes and ran down my cheeks, as I thought
that in a few short days it would shelter me no more. The half-formed
fears of extreme youth are perhaps harder to endure than our later
forebodings, being intensified by the sharpness of imagination and the
uncertainty of ignorance as well. With my outward senses I took in all
the beauty of the morning: the blue sky and the dancing waves, the
sparkle of the snow so dazzling in its country purity, and the wild
glad cries of the sea-gulls never still; but my heart was cold and very
heavy, because for the first time in my life I feared the future with
the dull aching fear that I suppose only a helpless woman can ever know.

At the door of Rosyth House, Robert dismounted stiffly and lifted me
to the ground. The noise of Sandy’s hoofs could not have been heard on
the snow-covered approach, but my feet had scarce touched the threshold
when the door was pulled quickly open and I found myself in the arms of
my kind old nurse.

“What news, woman?” cried Robert Guthrie, hoarsely before I could
speak, for Phemie was his wife, though many years his junior, and had
been, as long as I could remember, the prop and stay of our household.
She looked at him over my shoulder, and shook her head sadly.

“Oh, wheesht, my bairn, wheesht!” she crooned above my head, for I had
burst out crying, and she drew me into the lobby and softly shut the
door. “There, there,” she went on tenderly, “I’ll no’ stop ye; just
greet yer fill, and syne ye’ll feel a’ the better for’t.”

As she spoke she led me into the parlour where was a bright fire
burning, very pleasant to the chilled little traveller, and a basin of
her own famous chicken-broth was steaming on the table. And very soon,
warmed, fed and comforted by the excellent creature, I felt the deadly
weight at my heart lighten, and the future, in spite of its impending
bereavement, did not appear altogether hopeless. So wonderful is the
power of human sympathy, and the touch of a warm, kindly hand upon our
own.

Upstairs in his chamber Colonel Stewart lay dying, and thither Phemie
conducted me as soon as she considered me capable of bearing myself
with dignity and self-control.

“Be a woman, my dear lamb, for yer gran’pa’s sake!” she whispered, as
she led me to his door. “The Colonel’s far through, his time is gey
short.”

The room was bare and empty for the bed-chamber of the master of the
house, but the old soldier had ever treated himself with a certain
austerity bred of early days of hardship in the field; and his wife,
my grandmother, being long dead, there had been none to interfere with
his love of simple things. His bed had neither tester nor hangings, and
there was no carpet on the floor nor curtains at the window. One of the
shutters was partially closed to soften the glare from the snow, but
the winter sunshine brightened the room and showed me the face of my
grandfather on the pillow, very white and worn, and with closed eyes.
He opened them as we approached, and smiled as his glance fell on me.

“Ah, Barbara, my child!” he cried, and my heart gave a hard throb at
the weak tones of his voice. “You have come, I am glad you are here.
’Tis a cold journey from Embro’ in the winter-time. Has the bairn had
her noon-chin?” he enquired of Phemie, for he was ever kindly and
courteous, and wondrous thoughtful about small things, unusually so
for a man, as I now know. On being assured that I was neither cold nor
hungry, he motioned me to sit by him, and signified to Phemie that he
wished to be alone with me.

“Go you and see to the comfort of your gudeman, and tell him I thank
him for bringing the wee leddy home in time.”

When she was gone, “My dear Barbara,” said he, “this is as unexpected
as most of the blows of Fate, but as Fate is only another name for the
Hand of God, it behoves us to bow to its dictates. I hope I know how
to die as a soldier and a Christian should, but ’tis hard to leave a
woman-bairn alone in the world.”

The thin, tired voice with which my dear grandpapa spoke touched my
heart with sorrow even more than the words he said. I laid my hand on
his, so brown and wrinkled, and turned away my face that he might not
see my tears.

After a pause he went on.

“You are, my dear girl, the only child of two only children, and I
myself had neither brother nor sister. Your relatives are therefore few
and distant. There are in France some cousins of your late dear mother,
but seeing I know them not, I have no mind to send you so far seeking a
home. Dost remember thy mother, dear bairn?”

I nodded doubtfully.

“I have mind of her face,” I said, “and how soft and white her hands
were--much softer than my good Phemie’s, I always thought,--and I mind
the way she kissed me and held me in her arms.”

Colonel Stewart sighed.

“Poor bairn, you were but a babe when she died. A great loss, Barbara!
Your mother was a notable woman. But I’m wondering if you have any mind
of a friend of hers--the Honourable Catherine Sinclair, to wit, from
Dysart, that used to come a great deal about Rosyth at that time?”

I peered far back into my childish memories, and then I smiled.

“Was she a lady in a blue gown?” I cried, “with a string of pearls
round her neck? She was very merry and kind, and talked French with my
mother. She told me to call her Cousin Katie.”

“Very like, very like,” said my grandfather, “though I cannot swear to
the colour of her gown. But she was a blithe, happy creature, and very
fond of your mother, Barbara.”

“Yes, sir.”

“It is to her that I look to befriend you, child, when I am gone. Your
father and she were cousins in the fourth degree through their mothers,
and her father, my Lord Sinclair, for old friendship’s sake, may be
willing to give you a home at the Hermitage at Dysart, for so his house
is called, until you are of an age to choose your own place of abode.”

Here he stopped again and pointed feebly to a bottle of cordial that
stood with a glass upon the table. I hastened to pour some out and held
it to his lips, trembling inwardly lest he should faint from weakness,
or die with me alone in the room. My fears, however, were not realised,
for after a few minutes’ silence he spoke again.

“The year after your dear mother died, Catherine Sinclair was wedded to
Sir John Erskine of Alva, a gentleman of old and noble family, greatly
respected in the country. His mother was Mistress Christian Dundas of
Arniston, a clever and pious woman who is still living. Though the
younger Lady Alva has not been here since her marriage, I have met
her at her father’s house, where she comes frequently to stay, and
have been greatly attracted by her kindliness and good sense. There
are some wild tales abroad about her husband, Sir John, but though he
is impulsive and reckless in certain directions, I take him to be as
honest and kind-hearted as he is witty and pleasant in company.”

Again he paused to gather strength, and I watched a sunbeam that had
strayed to the wide fire-place, and seemed to play at fighting with the
flames that flickered somewhat feebly round the half-charred log. I
took no interest in sunbeam or fire at the time, and yet it all comes
back to me as if I had seen it but yesterday.

“Your fortune, Barbara,” said my grandfather, so suddenly that I
started, “is not small. You are no penniless lass, thank God! and your
affairs are safe in the hands of my good friends and lawyers, Messrs
Carmichael & Dymock, Writers to the Signet in Embro’. Two days back I
writ a letter to my Lady Erskine at the Hermitage, where I believe her
now to be, giving her all particulars and information concerning my
affairs. Her brother-in-law, Charles Erskine, a shrewd lawyer, will
assist her in any difficulty, and I have appointed these two your
guardians until the time you shall come of age, or marry.”

“Yes, sir,” I murmured, as the low voice ceased; and as if he had come
to an end of all that was in his mind, he turned his head aside and
fell into a light slumber.

During the night the inflammation and fever increased, and towards
evening of the next day he died. His last look and words were for his
faithful comrade and servant. He had been lying unconscious for some
hours, or so it seemed, and we had thought that he would pass without a
sign, but suddenly he opened his eyes and fixed them on Robert Guthrie
standing at the foot of his bed.

“It’s marching orders I’ve got, Rob,” he said, in a stronger voice than
could have been expected, “and I maun leave you behind. But you’ll
follow, my man, as soon as you’re able.”

And Robbie, speechless with grief, brought his hand to the salute, and
standing thus motionless he watched his old master die.




CHAPTER III

OF MY NEW GUARDIAN, AND HER KINDNESS


The snow was very deep and still falling on the day of my grandfather’s
funeral, and many of his friends and neighbours who would willingly
have honoured Colonel Stewart by following him to the grave, were
unable to win through the drifts to Inverkeithing. Had the roads been
more passable they would, Phemie told me, have thought little of riding
twenty, thirty, or even fifty miles to foregather at Rosyth House,
partly out of friendship for the dead man no doubt, but also because
such meetings are a means of seeing friends and hearing news in a quiet
and not over populous neighbourhood.

For the honour of the house, our good Phemie saw to it that the board
was well-spread in the dining-room, and that roast and boiled meats
in plenty, and the best of my poor grandpapa’s cellar, were set forth
before the hungry mourners. But out of pity for the orphan girl,
whom they knew to be alone in the house, the gentlemen were wondrous
considerate, and neither sat long over their meat, nor indulged freely
in wine-drinking. The names of some of these kindly men, as retailed
to me by Phemie, are still clear in my memory. There were Mr. Moubray
of Culcarnie, or Cockairney as it is now called; Sir John Henderson of
Fordell; and the Earl of Moray from Donibristle Castle. Sir Alexander
Bruce, he that was now Earl of Kincardine, came from Broomhall; and
Sir Robert Blackwood, that not long before had purchased the estate of
Pitreavie, rode with him to show respect to the old Colonel’s memory.

I was sitting in an upper chamber, disconsolate enough, and growing
rather weary of the murmur of voices below, when I heard what seemed
to be the bustle of an arrival at the front door.

“Some late comer,” I was thinking, with girlish bitterness, “just in
time to join the feast,” when my door opened, and I heard a pleasant
voice say softly, “Nay, I thank you, I would see the young lady alone,”
and rising from my seat I was confronted by a lady still wrapped in her
travelling cloak, who came forward quickly, pushing back the hood from
her face.

“My poor Barbara,” cried she, “to think that a girl should be alone on
such a day as this! I would have given twenty pound to have been with
you earlier, my bairn, but I will explain the delay by-and-bye. Didst
think thyself forsaken by all kind friends, my little Barbara, as well
ye might?”

Then putting her hands on my shoulders, and holding me from her, she
smiled.

“Nay! not little Barbara now, but tall Barbara, bonny Barbara, winsome
Barbara. Even with so sad a face you mind me of your mother, child, but
never, oh never, will you be as beautiful as she.”

Without speaking I drew her to the settle by the fire. I knew very well
who she was--my lady in the blue gown, with the merry voice and the
kind smile, the “Cousin Katie” of my childhood, my new guardian, Lady
Erskine. And then she fell to talking of my loss, and praised my dear
grandpapa for a kindly and courteous gentleman, a brave and honourable
soldier, a man of wisdom and intellect, polished and mellowed by
contact with the world. I know not now all she said of him, but when
she ended, I felt that it was a proud thing to be the granddaughter of
such a man, even although he had borne no high-sounding title, nor held
any great position as the world counts greatness.

After a thoughtful silence between us, she took my hand in hers and
smiled brightly.

“And now for my explanation and apology, Barbara. I was indeed expected
at the Hermitage a sennight since, as Colonel Stewart had heard, but
alas! what should befall but that my youngest son should be ailing--no
serious sickness, thank God! but one of those childish bouts of heats
and chills, when the little head is heavy and the active limbs grow
weak, and the poor bairn lacks nothing but to lie in its minnie’s lap.
I fear you will blame me, Barbara; I am held by my own sisters to be a
weak and foolish mother in that I let my children see how much I love
them. Alack! I cannot hinder my love from having its way, and when a
bairn is sick, and weak, and helpless, what better place can be found
for it than its mother’s arms?

“Ah, I see you agree with me, my dear, I have nothing to fear from your
censure. Well, my little Harry held me in Alva with his tiny hands,
though had I known the truth of what was happening here, I own I would
have tried to break away a little sooner. I arrived at Dysart only
last night, found your poor grandpapa’s letter awaiting me there, and
learned the sad news that he was to be buried to-day. All my brothers
are from home, and my lord is an old man unfit to venture out in such
a storm; otherwise, my dear, some of my family would have been present
at the funeral. But when I thought of you, poor child, alone and
friendless in your sorrow, I could not wait another day before I came
to you.”

“Indeed, cousin,” I said, “I am most grateful and glad to see you. But
I know not how your horses had power to drag you through the drifts.
Did not the wheels stick often?”

“I did not come on wheels, my dear, or I should never have reached you.”

“What, did you ride then?” I cried, astonished.

“No, no, I sat in my coach and kept as warm among my wraps as possible.”

Then, seeing my perplexity, she added,

“Have you never heard how in colder countries than Scotland the people
ride about in winter in sleighs, that glide over the surface of the
snow without making any deep ruts as wheels would? You must know
that my husband’s youngest brother, Dr. Robert Erskine, is private
physician to that great man, Peter, the Czar of all the Russias,
and lives with him in Moscow, the capital of his kingdom. Well,
when brother Robin writes about the sleighing and the comfort and
convenience of it, and how smoothly they rush along, Sir John, my
husband, claps his hand to his forehead and cries out, ‘Just the thing
for Scotland! we’ll try it when the first snow comes!’ Oh, Barbara!”
cried my lady with sparkling eyes, “there never was such a man as mine
for trying new inventions, they are verily the delight of his life.
So he writes to Russia for instructions as to the method, and gets a
drawing from his brother how it’s done, and then when next the snow
lies deep, off come the wheels of our lightest coach, and ’tis placed
on runners and becomes a sleigh.”

“And now, my dear Barbara,” said my lady, after I had asked many eager
questions and received most kind replies, “now we must talk business.
How old are you, my dear?”

“I shall be seventeen, madam, in February.”

“Why, you are a woman grown. Too old to go back to school, eh?”

“Oh, madame!” I cried, “if only I need not return!”

“Ah! you have not much love for the blackboard and the ruler; or is it
the virginal and tambour-stitch that you are weary of?”

“Nay, cousin, I love my lessons, and my dear grandpapa was, as you
know, a learned gentleman. We read many books together that Mistress
Lindsay and her sister, I am sure, never saw. He made me study French
and talk it with him all my life, that I might not forget my mother’s
tongue. The sisters Lindsay could teach me no more of that than I knew.
I like to play on the virginal and sing, and my satin-piece and sampler
were the best in the school. I can walk a minuet and sweep a curtsey
with the best, and--and--in fact, madam, I know not what more they can
teach me!”

To this conceited speech, my lady replied with a smile and the quiet
remark,

“You had a more fortunate up-bringing than many country maids, my
dear. Never forget what you owe to your good grandfather’s care. But
still, I think,” she continued, “though not quite for the reasons you
give, that you have been long enough at school, and now as to the
question of a home.”

“My grandpapa thought,” I ventured timidly, “that perhaps my Lord
Sinclair, your father----”

“Yes,” she interrupted, “he writ me of that in his letter. But the
Hermitage is not the home I should choose for you. My lord is old, and
my sisters are often away from home. You would scarce be happy at the
Hermitage, Barbara; do you think you could be happy with me?”

“With you, madam?” I cried.

“At Alva,” she replied. “There are the two little boys, you know,
Charles and Henry--very good-humoured children, though I, their
mother, say it. They keep us stirring I can tell you, and dear little
companions they are. Charles is not yet six years old, he is called
after his paternal grandfather; little Henry, my father’s namechild, is
just turned four. There was another, Barbara----”

She paused, and her eyes took that deep, still look that I have seen in
the eyes of other mothers of dead children.

“Little Jamie, my bonnie baby! God only lent him to us for a few
months, not quite a year, then He took him back again. Ah, Barbara,
to see your baby lying dead--that makes a wound in a mother’s heart
that the good God himself cannot wholly heal; indeed, I think He knows
better than to try. But let us not speak of these sad things. Do you
think you could live happy with us at Alva?”

“Oh, very gladly indeed, madam,” I cried. “But Sir John--he has not
been asked. He knows nothing as yet of my dear grandfather’s death.”

“My dear,” said Lady Erskine, and the light in her face made even me,
a young girl, wonder, “Sir John is my husband, and master in his own
house truly, but he is still my lover, my best friend, my kindest
companion, and no wish that I express doth he ever gainsay. Whether it
be that I never wish for anything that could displease him I know not,
but I am very sure that I have only to tell him the truth about you,
and to say that I desire you to live with us, for him to receive you at
Alva with the warmest, most fatherly of welcomes. His brother, Charles,
is, as you know, appointed your other guardian, and it is meet and
right you should share our home.”

And so, in short, it was arranged, and more besides, for before she
left Rosyth that day, my Lady Erskine had talked with Robert and
Phemie, and prayed them in her gracious way, to accompany me to Alva
House.

“If Robert will take charge of the stables,” she said, “he will be
doing Sir John a kindness, and find enough to occupy his time; and as
for you, my good Phemie, I ask nothing better than to install you as
head of my nursery, where you may keep an eye on my turbulent little
lads, and watch over your own young lady as well.”

Not all of her kind intentions were carried out, however, for alas! old
Robert had contracted so grievous a chill standing bare-headed in the
snow-storm by Colonel Stewart’s grave, that a mighty inflammation of
the lungs set in, and before ten days were past the good old man was
laid at the feet of his beloved master.

“I kent weel hoo it wad be!” said Phemie sadly, yet with a certain
pride in her tones. “Robbie was aye that set upon the maister, he just
couldna bide wantin’ him!”
